The following analysis is based on a retrospective sampIe of 25 telecommunications firms that declared bankruptcy between May 2000 and January 2002 that had issued financial statements for at least two years, and information from the December 2000 financial statements of 25 telecommunications that did not declare bankruptcy (data given in the file bankruptcy). I am indebted to Jeffrey Lui for gathering these data. The nonbankrupt firms were chosen to try to match asset sizes with the bankrupt firms, although no formal matching has been done here. Five financial ratios were chosen as potential predictors of bankruptcy:
1. Working capital as a percentage of total assets (We/TA, expressed as a percentage). Working capital is the difference between current assets and liabilities, and is thus a measure of liquidity as it relates to total capitalization. Firms on the road to bankruptcy would be expected to have less liquidity.
2. Retained earnings as a percentage of total assets (RE/TA, expressed as a percentage). This is a measure of cumulative profitability over time, and is thus an indicator of profit ability, and also of age. A younger firm is less likely to be able to retain earnings, since it would reinvest most, if not all, of its earnings in order to stimulate growth. Both youth and less profit ability would be expected to be associated with an increased risk of insolvency.
3. Earnings before interest and taxes as a percentage of total assets (EBIT/TA, expressed as a percentage). This is a measure of the productivity of a firm's assets, with higher productivity expected to be associated with a healthy firm.
4. Sales as a percentage of total assets (S/TA, expressed as a percentage). This is the standard capital turnover ratio, indicating the ability of a firm's assets to generate sales; lower sales would be expected to be associated with unhealthy prospects for a firm.
5. Book value of equity divided by book value of total liabilities (BVE/BVL). This ratio measures financial leverage, being the inverse of the debt to equity ratio. A smaller value is indicative of the decline of a firm's assets relative to its liabilities, presumably an indicator of unhealthiness. While it is typical in bankruptcy studies to use the market value of equity in this ratio, the "Internet bubble" of the late 1990s makes this problematic. It was not at all unusual during this time period for so-called dot-coms to have very high stock prices that collapsed within a matter of months, making the market value of equity unrealistically high before the collapse.
